---
layout: post
title:  "Playing around with GraalVM"
date:   2020-07-03 20:39:00 +0200
categories: graalvm scala native-image
---
# Building native images and compiling with GraalVM and sbt

At work we organized a two-day long Hackathon, a colleague and I took the chance to dig into the wonderful world of GraalVM. 

I've heard of GraalVM first around two years ago, where Oleg Šelajev toured through Java User Groups in Germany and held talks about GraalVM. [Here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GinNxS3OSi0) is one from 2019 (not Germany, but Spain this time).

GraalVM promises a significant speed up in compile times and as I am working with Scala which is notoriously known for its long compile times this seems interesting.
Furthermore GraalVM provides functionality to build native executables. Meaning, an application can be run without a Java Virtual Machine.

Thanks to the Hackathon I took finally the time to get to know GraalVM a bit better.
With this blog post I want to share our findings, experiences and results, as they might be helpful for you too!

*If you want to read a more elaborate answer to what GraalVM is.
You can expand the following section.*

<details>
  <summary>About GraalVM</summary>

  ## What is GraalVM?

  GraalVM is a high-performance compiler. 
This should only give you a short understanding what it is and what it can do. You can read and watch more about it for example [here](), [here]() and [here]().

Our motivation for trying out GraalVM were tackling the pain points of Scala and Java projects and microservices.
Scala's long compile times and 
</details>

## Project setup
The project we worked on during the Hackathon is an API that is used to apply as an developer at the company.
Exposing one endpoint with which a resume and contact information can be submitted.

It is also a good project to test out GraalVM, nothing too complex but also not as simple as "Hello World".

The full setup can be found [on github](https://github.com/erewl/graalvm-scala). But I'll give here a short summary:
The project is built around following libraries, no particular reason, simply because I like them.
- *cats* for working with effects, such as IO
- *http4s* for running the server
- *tapir* for defining the endpoints
- *circe* for json de/serialisation
- *pureconfig* for reading config-files
- *logback* for logging

The project can be run via `sbt run ` and with Postman or similar a POST-request can be sent like so:
```
POST localhost:8080/api/v1/apply

{
    "email": "my@email.de",
    "name": "itsame",
    "phoneNumber": "1234567890",
    "applicationBase64": "VGhpcyBjb3VsZCBiZSB5b3VyIGFwcGxpY2F0aW9uIQ=="
}
```


## Setup GraalVM with sbt

With this initial project setup in mind, the installation and setup of GraalVM follows.

To compile and build native images with GraalVM you have prepare to things:
- install GraalVM
- add the sbt-native-packager to your project

Autocompletion should help you with finding graal-commands, e.g.:
```
$ sbt 
scala> graalvm-native-image:packageBin
```
* * *

## Compiling and running
It has to be specified in sbt that not the regular JDK/JVM is used. This can be done with the `java_home` option on sbt bootup:

```
$ export GRAAL_HOME=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/graalvm-ce-java8-20.1.0/Contents/Home
$ sbt -java-home $GRAALHOME
```
The path to GraalVM can vary depending on OS and installation. 
I followed the basic installation for MacOS.

Now sbt using GraalVM can be verified:
```
$ sbt -java-home $GRAALHOME
scala> eval System.getProperty("java.home")
[info] ans: String = /Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/graalvm-ce-java8-20.1.0/Contents/Home/jre
```

That means everything running in this sbt instance is getting compiled by GraalVM. Awesome!

I didn't measure the compile time and build time with GraalVM because in this project of this size I haven't noticed any significant difference. And there are some resources that did a good job on benchmarking towards that matter.

In general, sbt's boot up time is just what is taking quite some time, and also with GraalVM as an underlying JVM I didn't notice a speed up with that.

Anyways, next step is now to become strong and independent and learn how to run without an underlying JVM! We are going to build a native image.

## Building native images

### Setup

GraalVM ships with the [GraalVM Updater](https://www.graalvm.org/docs/reference-manual/native-image/) (`gu`) to install the `native-image` on your machine.
```
$ $GRAALHOME/bin/gu install native-image
```

[sbt-native-packager](https://sbt-native-packager.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) provides functionality to build packages in an easy way (e.g. Docker) and it also provides support for building native images. 
In order to build native images with sbt commands this has to be added as a plugin:
```
// inside project/plugins.sbt
addSbtPlugin("com.typesafe.sbt" % "sbt-native-packager" % "1.7.3")
```
And in the project the `GraalVMNativeImagePlugin` needs to be enabled:
```
// inside build.sbt
enablePlugins(GraalVMNativeImagePlugin)
```

* * *
### Disclaimer
In the next three sections are not a write up but rather the main steps I had to take to make it working. This includes failing images and troubleshooting.
I keep this in because it might be interesting for others when they have to troubleshoot.
For the summary and happy path you can jump directly to [Summary](#summary)
* * *

### First try building a native image

To activate those changes sbt needs a `reload` or restart. Next up can be run `graalvm-native-image:packageBin` from within sbt. This might take a while (for me it took about a minute)

Some warnings start to pop up:
```
[error] warning: unknown locality of class Lde/katrin/pricetracker/server/Main$anon$exportedReader$macro$24$1;, assuming class is not local. To remove the warning report an issue to the library or language author. The issue is caused by Lde/katrin/pricetracker/server/Main$anon$exportedReader$macro$24$1; which is not following the naming convention.

[error] warning: unknown locality of class Lfs2/internal/Algebra$Done$2$;, assuming class is not local. To remove the warning report an issue to the library or language author. The issue is caused by Lfs2/internal/Algebra$Done$2$; which is not following the naming convention.
```

But ultimately it fails with:
```
Error: com.oracle.graal.pointsto.constraints.UnresolvedElementException: Discovered unresolved type during parsing: org.slf4j.impl.StaticLoggerBinder. To diagnose the issue you can use the --allow-incomplete-classpath option. The missing type is then reported at run time when it is accessed the first time.
```
(TODO explain why)
(TODO INVESTIGATE ABOUT MACROS)

Actually some good hints on where to start fine-tuning the GraalVM config:

```
// inside build.sbt
graalVMNativeImageOptions ++= Seq(
  "-H:+ReportExceptionStackTraces",
  "--allow-incomplete-classpath",
)
```

`ReportExceptionStackTraces` does exactly what its name says, printing stack traces of exception which helps troubleshooting.

The option `--allow-incomplete-classpath` also has a quite expressive name. Something's like, a `StaticLoggerBinder`, only get resolved at runtime, meaning at compile time the classpath can be incomplete.

During the build of a native image GraalVM tries to resolve those runtime dependencies already at compile time [SOURCE NEEDED STILL](). With this flag GraalVM knows "hey, don't worry about it now, we cross the bridge when we get there". (Or something like that)

### Adding resource files

A `reload` (or restart) of sbt is needed to activate these new options. And we can try to build the native image up new.
This time the build finished successfully and the executable file `target/graalvm-native-image/apply-at-vdb` has been created!
This is an executable that can be run without a JVM:
```
$ target/graalvm-native-image/apply-at-vdb
```
But what's that? It actually cannot be started...
```
$ target/graalvm-native-image/apply-at-vdb

SLF4J: Failed to load class "org.slf4j.impl.StaticLoggerBinder".
SLF4J: Defaulting to no-operation (NOP) logger implementation
SLF4J: See http://www.slf4j.org/codes.html#StaticLoggerBinder for further details.
*** An error occured! ***
Cannot convert configuration to a de.erewl.pricetracker.server.Config. Failures are:
  at the root:
    - Key not found: 'host'.
    - Key not found: 'port'.
```
The first three lines relate to the error that occurred during the first build. It simply says that logging hasn't been setup correctly (maybe due to the absence of a `src/main/resources/logback.xml` or some other misconfiguration), triggering the default setting of not logging anything at all.
The second error states that a configuration file has not the right keys or cannot be found at all.
Looking into `src/main/resources`:
```
$ ls src/main/resources/
application.conf  logback.xml
```
and peeking into `application.conf`:
```
$ cat src/main/resources/application.conf
host = "localhost"
port = 8080
```
Hm, so everything is actually in place. But somehow GraalVM can't find them. 
It requires still some more GraalVM fine-tuning here.

By default GraalVM doesn't include any resource/configuration-files.
The option `-H:IncludeResourceConfigurationFiles=path/to/resource-config.json` defines a path to a json-configuration file:
So inside the `resource-config.json` we can include our `application.conf` and our `logback.xml`. 
But writing those config files can be tedious and it is difficult in larger projects to find all necessary classes that need to be included.

GraalVM provides some support with writing those files and actually does all the work.
```
$ mkdir configs
$ $GRAALHOME/bin/java -agentlib:native-image-agent=config-output-dir=./configs
```
With this command above GraalVM intercepts the [dynamic lookups](https://www.graalvm.org/docs/Native-Image/user/CONFIGURE) during runtime and write them to the files: `jni-config.json`, `proxy-config.json`, `reflect-config.json` and `resource-config.json`.
For now I just look at the latter.

Those generated files can be included in the GraalVMNativeImageOptions:
```
// in our build.sbt
graalVMNativeImageOptions ++= Seq(
  "-H:+ReportExceptionStackTraces",
  "--allow-incomplete-classpath",
  "-H:IncludeResourceConfigurationFiles=/configs/resource-config.json",
)
```
Hoping for the best, I built the image which was successful and start up the server:
```
$ target/graalvm-native-image/apply-at-vdb

SLF4J: Failed to load class "org.slf4j.impl.StaticLoggerBinder".
SLF4J: Defaulting to no-operation (NOP) logger implementation
SLF4J: See http://www.slf4j.org/codes.html#StaticLoggerBinder for further details.
```
Hmmm, still no logging, sadly . But the server is actually running and can receive POST requests via its exposed endpoint:
```
POST localhost:8080/api/v1/apply

{
    "email": "my@email.de",
    "name": "itsame",
    "phoneNumber": "1234567890",
    "applicationBase64": "VGhpcyBjb3VsZCBiZSB5b3VyIGFwcGxpY2F0aW9uIQ=="
}
```

Next and last step will investigate why logging is not picked up by GraalVM.

### Investigating the missing logging
It was a real head scratcher for me why the logging wasn't working.
I actually let this blog post rest for a week or two and had a look at it with a fresh mind.

So first I wanted to have a look if it was an overall issue with logging. 
I stepped back from using logging-framework and tried the most basic logging with the java-integrated `java.util.Logging`. GraalVM's [docs](https://www.graalvm.org/docs/Native-Image/user/LOGGING) stated that GraalVM supports any logging that depends on that. 

And with that logging was working.

So it must be something with the dependencies?

For further investigation, I added the [sbt-dependency-graph](https://github.com/jrudolph/sbt-dependency-graph) plugin and checked out the dependency-tree with `sbt dependencyBrowserTree`. Logback wasn't included in the dependency tree.
Which is odd! Logback is clearly in the library-dependencies. 
```
// inside build.sbt
libraryDependencies ++= Seq(
  ...
  "ch.qos.logback" % "logback-classic" % "1.2.3" % Runtime,
  "ch.qos.logback" % "logback-core" % "1.2.3" % Runtime,
  ...
)
```
Uh oh, what's that? Logback's dependency has `% Runtime` appended. 

Not sure where this was coming from but I most probably blindly copy-pasted it from somewhere when gathering the dependencies for this project. 

[sbt reference manual](https://www.scala-sbt.org/1.x/docs/Scopes.html#Scoping+by+the+configuration+axis) states that the appendix `Runtime` defines that this dependency will be only included in the runtime classpath. 

So this explains probably why logging was only working, when the server was run from inside sbt.

With removing this and building the native-image, logback appears in the depedency-tree and logging works when the native image is executed!


### Building native images - Summary
To achieve a successful setup of sbt and GraalVM to build native-images I had to:

- install GraalVM's native-image via ...
- add sbt-native-packager to sbt
- identify the needed files via ...
- fine-tune GraalVM with the following options:
- build the native image via ...
- run the executable file without the need of java

With a working native-image it is time to dockerize.


## Building docker images

In this section two docker containers will be built.
One, following the "normal"-java way and the other will be using the native-image to build a Docker-container without Java.

Before getting started with native images, a regular JAR-file for comparison can be built.

With the [sbt-assembly](https://github.com/sbt/sbt-assembly) plugin you can create JAR-files with all of its dependencies (fat JARs).
`sbt assembly` creates this `target/scala-2.12/apply-at-vdb-assembly-0.1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar` file which you can just run with `java -jar target/scala-2.12/apply-at-vdb-assembly-0.1.0-SNAPSHOT.jar` from the root directory of this project.


## Summary

The initial start and setup of GraalVM with sbt is pretty easy and straight forward.
Getting GraalVM to compile a sbt project is nice and simple. The challenge is to get it to build a good native image. This requires some fine tuning. 

Getting the logging up and running on a native image was the biggest challenge for me with this small project, but only because I had an error in my library dependencies.

* * * 
### Sources
Here are some articles, blog posts etc. that I read while working on this topic:
